\chapterwithauthor{亨利·贝吉乌斯}{跨项目协作}

\authorbio{亨利·贝吉乌斯是做免费软件存储库的米德加德公司的创始人。
 他也在Maemo和MeeGo社区花了很长一段时间参与到Linux桌面位置感知工作中。
 他经营了一家叫做Nemein的小型咨询公司， 钻研CoffeeScript和PHP, 也把许
 多空余时间花在骑摩托车横跨亚欧大陆到一些偏远地方。他生活在寒冷的北欧
 城市，芬兰首都赫尔辛基。}

\begin{quote}
可能会有一个全新的世界,对于你的价值判断越来越多的取决于你是谁而不是你
有什么,取决于你所创建并共享,然后其他人能钻研下去的东西。” -- 前施乐PARC
研究中心主任约翰·希利·布朗在“乐观主义者的未来之旅”上的发言(马克•史
蒂文森,2010年)
\end{quote}

\section*{On projects and communities}

Much of the free software world is split into tribes gathered around something
called projects. There are major projects like GNOME, KDE or Drupal, and lots of
smaller projects revolving around a single application or a library.

Actually, calling them projects is kind of silly.

In my mind, a project is a plan of effort towards an achievable aim, with a
schedule that has start and end dates. So, for example GNOME 3.1 would be a
project, but GNOME as whole is not. It is a community of individuals maintaining
and creating a body of software through various smaller efforts, or projects.

Enough with pedantry. The problem with the concept of projects is that they end
up keeping people apart, creating insular communities that often are reluctant
or unable to collaborate with ``the competition''. But in the end, all of these
communities consist of individuals who write free software, and it is their
choice whether this software can be used in different environments or not.

In the end we all want the software we created to be used by others. And even
better, we want others to join in our efforts and build cool stuff on what we
have created. That is, after all, what is in the heart of free software.

So why do we enact these walls around ourselves? Keeping an insulated community
just fosters an us-versus-them mentality. The incompatibilities of different
programming languages already do so much to keep us apart, why add to that? 

\section*{The Midgard lesson}

What I wish I had known when I started, in those optimistic dot-com days of the late
90s, is that in reality software efforts do not need to be isolated. With a bit
of care we can share our software and ideas across communities, making both the
communities and our software stronger and better.

When I started my free software career, it was a time of big projects. Netscape
was open-sourced, the Apache Software Foundation was getting a form, and
venture-funded efforts were going on everywhere. It felt like a norm to try and
build your own community. This was the sure path to fame, fortune and building
cool stuff.

So what we did was build our own web framework. Back then there were not that
many of them, especially for the fledgling PHP language. PHP was not even the
first choice for us, only picked after a long debate about using Scheme which
our lead developer preferred. But PHP was gaining popularity, becoming
the programming language of the web. And web was what we wanted to build.

At first, things looked very promising. Lots of developers flocked into our
community and started contributing. There were even companies founded around
Midgard. And the framework became more featureful, and more tighly coupled.

In hindsight, this was the mistake we made. We positioned Midgard to be
something apart from PHP itself. Something that you would install separately,
and build whole websites on top of. It was either our way or the highway.

With Midgard you would have to use our content repository interfaces for
everything, as well as our user management and permissions model. You would have
to use our templating system, and store much of your code into the repository
instead of a file system.

This obviously did not sit too well with the wider PHP community. Our ideas were
strange to them, and Midgard at the time was even distributed as a huge patch to
the codebase, as PHP3 did not have loadable modules.

Many years have passed, and PHP’s popularity has waxed and waned. At the same
time the Midgard community has been quite constant -- a small, tightly knit
group making progress in the long run, but apart from the wider PHP
world.

We always wondered why we found it so hard to interact with the PHP world. Even
some communities doing something completely different, like the GNOME desktop,
seemed easier to approach. Only recently, after years of isolation, we realized
the problem. In a nutshell: frameworks keep us apart, while libraries allow us to
share our code and experiences.

\section*{On libraries and frameworks}

In the end, software is about automation, about building tools that people can
use for solving problems or connecting with each other. With software, these
tools have many layers in them. There are low-level services like an operating
system, then there are libraries, frameworks and toolkits, and then there are
actual applications.

Applications are always written for some particular usecase, and so between
them there are very few opportunities for sharing code.

The much more appealing opportunity is on the libraries and frameworks level. A
framework, if generic enough, can usually be utilized for building different
sorts of software. And a library can be used to bring a particular piece of
logic or connectivity anywhere. In my view, this is the layer where most
programming should happen, with specific applications being just something that
connects various libraries into a framework that then runs the actual app.

What is a library and what is a framework? People often use these terms
interchangeably, but there is a useful rule of thumb to know which is which: a
library is something that your code calls, while a framework is something that
calls your code.

If you want your code to be used and improved upon, the best way to go about it
is to maximize the number of potential users and contributors. With free
software, this works by ensuring your code can be adapted to multiple different
situations and environments.

In the end, what you want to do is to build a library. Libraries are cool.

\section*{How to make collaboration work}

The hardest part is to get over the barrier of them-versus-us. The developers of
the other community are hackers building free software, just like you. So just
get over the question and start talking with them.

After you have the discussion going, here are some points that I have found
important when actually implementing common ideas or libraries across project
boundaries:

\begin{itemize}
\item Use permissive licensing and try to avoid copyright assignments or other
requirements potential users would find onerous.
\item Host the project on neutral ground. For web projects, Apache is quite a
good home. For desktop projects, Freedesktop is probably the best option.
\item Use technologies that do not impose too many constraints. Libraries should
be quite low-level, or provide D-Bus APIs that can be used with any system.
\item Avoid framework-specific dependencies. For example, KDE has found GeoClue
hard to adopt because it uses GNOME-specific settings interfaces.
\item Meet the other guys. If you are from the GNOME project, go to aKademy and
give a talk, and if you are a KDE developer, go and talk at GUADEC. After you
have shared a beer or two collaboration over IRC happens much more naturally.
\item Finally, accept that not everybody will use your implementation. But if
they at least implement the same ideas, then collaboration is still possible.
\end{itemize}

Good luck with breaking down the project boundaries! In most cases it works if
your ideas are good and presented with an open mind.  But even if you do not
find a common ground, as long as your implementation solves the use case for you
it has not been in vain. After all, delivering software, and delivering great
user experience is what counts.
